# 1.9 Databricks Repos

- [ ] In this lesson, we are going to explore **`Databricks Repos`** <br/>

- [ ] As we saw in the previous lecture, notebooks have some basic revision control built in. While this feature is useful, it is fairly basic. 

    :::note
        For example, you cannot merge changes or create branches. In addition, this history can be easily deleted by the user. 
    :::

- [ ] Instead we can use **`Databricks Repos`**. **`Databricks Repos`** provides source control for your data projects by integrating with GitHub providers <br/>

- [ ] In order to work with **`Databricks Repos`**, we must first configure git integration in our workspace

## How to locate settings in Databricks to setup git integration?

- [ ] Under your username in the top bar, choose **`User settings`** from the menu <br/>

- [ ] Go to the **`git integration`** tab

    :::note
        As you can see from the git provider dropdown menu, Databricks has native integration with several git providers like GitHub and Azure DevOps
    :::

- [ ] To connect Databricks to one of the git providers, you need your git service username and a personal access token

    :::info
        In this demo we will use GitHub, so let us switch there to get this information
    :::

## How to locate the personal access token in GitHub?

- [ ] In GitHub, click on your avatar in the top bar

    :::info
        Here it displays the username for the account
    :::

- [ ] For the token, let us select **`Settings`** <br/>

- [ ] Scroll to **`Developer settings`**. <br/>

- [ ] From the left choose **`Personal Access Token`** <br/>

- [ ] Choose **`Tokens (classic)`** <br/>

- [ ] Click generate a new token, classic token<br/>

- [ ] In the new personal access token page, specify a note describing the purpose of the token and an expiration date<br/>

- [ ] Choose **`Repo scope`** and scroll to click **`Generate token`** <br/>

- [ ] Here is our token. Let us copy this string now

## How to connect Databricks to GitHub with the username and personal access token?

- [ ] Let us switch back to our Databricks workspace <br/>

- [ ] With GitHub selected as GitHub provider. Let us fill in our GitHub username and personal token <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Save`**

## How to create a new repository in GitHub?

- [ ] Each Databricks repo maps to a Git repository <br/>

- [ ] In order to set up a repo, let's first create a repository in GitHub <br/>

- [ ] Go to the main GitHub landing page and click **`New`** to create a repository <br/>

- [ ] Specify a name for the repository. <br/>

- [ ] Choose **`Private`**. And enable **`Add a README`** file <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Create repository`** <br/>

- [ ] Copy the HTTPS URL of this newly created repository<br/>

- [ ] Switch back to our Databricks workspace <br/>

- [ ] From the left side bar, go to the **`Repo`** tab. Click **`Add Repo`** <br/>

- [ ] Paste here the URL of the Git repository

    :::info
        Notice that the git provider and the repository name has been filled automatically
    :::

- [ ] Click **`Submit`** <br/>

- [ ] Here is our new repo, which contains a local copy of the remote git repository

## How to create a new branch in Databricks?

- [ ] Let us create a new branch named **`development`**<br/>

- [ ] Click on the branch name to open the Repo dialog <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Create branch`** <br/>

- [ ] Specify the branch name <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Create`**

    :::note
        Once created it automatically becomes the current branch
    :::

- [ ] With the **`development`** branch created and selected, we can now begin making changes as needed <br/>

- [ ] Let us create a folder **`my folder`**, for example <br/>

- [ ] Add a notebook <br/>

- [ ] You can also import a notebook. From file or URL

## How to clone an existing notebook from the Workspace?

- [ ] Or clone an existing notebook from the workspace into the repo <br/>

- [ ] Go to the **`Workspace`** tab <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Next`** to our Notebook Basics created in the last lecture and select **`Clone`**<br/>

- [ ] Choose my folder and click **`Clone`** <br/>

- [ ] If we go back to **`Databricks Repo`**, we see that our new folder containing two notebooks <br/>

- [ ] Let us now push these changes to our remote repository <br/>

- [ ] Click on the branch name

    :::info
        Here we see all our changes
    :::

- [ ] Let us first write a commit message <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Commit & push`** <br/>

- [ ] If we switch back now our main branch, as expected, we don't see here the new folder and notebooks we created in the **`development`** branch

## How to create a pull request in GitHub?

- [ ] To be able to pull these changes into the main branch, let us create a pull request in GitHub <br/>

- [ ] From here we go to the **`development`** branch <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Contribute`**, **`Open pull request`** <br/>

- [ ] Click **`Create pull request`**. Then **`Merge pull request`**. **`Confirm merge`**

## How to pull a branch from GitHub to Databricks?

- [ ] Let us switch back to our Databricks **`Workspace`** to see how to pull this in Databricks repos <br/>

- [ ] Click on the branch name to open the repos dialog <br/>

- [ ] With the main branch selected, click the **`Pull`** button on the right

    :::info
        Remember pulling regularly is important to avoid conflicts especially when multiple developers are developing on the same branch
    :::